---
layout: post
title:      "My Introduction to Data Science"
date:       2020-01-30 04:12:49 -0500
permalink:  my_introduction_to_data_science
---


     **I started my college career at UCSD as a pre-med student, though reluctantly.  My parents had immigrated into the US from China and was looking for a new life. Though my dad had completed doctorates in physics and eventually went on to become a successful electrical engineer, he had always wanted to be a doctor and felt his situation in China had hampered that dream. This dream was subsequently past down to me, subtly at first but this pressure seemed to increase as I started applying to college. After I was accepted into UCSD as a biochemistry major with a pre-med route, my dad was ecstatic, happy to see me follow his aspirations. I was apprehensive at first, knowing that my career choice was not necessarily my passion, but gradually fell into a rhythm of grinding through classes and going through the regular routine of a pre-med student. Though I did relatively well, my achievements were fueled primarily by my drive to get the best grades possible, rather than just the goal of becoming a doctor itself.  After graduating with pretty good grades, I was on course to take the MCAT the following year. This is where the holes started revealing themselves, without the guiding hand of college with its strict infrastructure and sets of classes,  my "passion" had started to wane and I began to question myself entirely. The motivation of getting good grades was gone. I could not pinpoint the feeling at first, but as the MCAT classes dragged on and application season was drawing closer and closer, I started feeling a sense of hopelessness and discomfort. Initially, I chalked up this feeling to post-grad syndrome, a phenomenon in which recently-graduated college students enter a temporary period of depression caused by the changes coming from college into the real world. However, this feeling only got worse and eventually I realized I needed a change. And though I knew I needed to, the motivation to change my career's course after years of hard work was soul-crushing.

     I don't know exactly when I had considered watching the stock market during this time. It had always been a fascination of mines as a kid but I had never pursued it, observing all the scars and ugliness around me that had been caused from both the 2001 tech-bubble crash and the 2008 housing crash and subsequent recession. However, I had recently read about the legalization of weed in Canada and how potential growth and profits in the blooming sector were boundless. I invested some of my money, therefore starting my love and passion for everything market related. It was a rocky ride at first. I felt all the pressures and drawbacks of a novice retail trader: greed and fear, hindsight bias, regret and much more. However, the interest in the subject itself was something far-exceeding anything I had learned during my pre-med route. After months of stress-ridden trading as a retail trader (non-professional trader), I pursued a more professional approach to it, as retail traders have less than a 10% chance of being profitable in the long-run. This led me to joining a proprietary trading firm as a part-time student trader. During these months, I tried to learn everything I could about both the emotional and fundamental aspects of trading from the firm. Along with some reading material suggested by them, I tried to read every highly-praised, trading book out there. The common theme was that trading successfully in the long-term is extremely difficult and requires not only hard work and intelligence but strong emotional control. Though many traders would have more winners than losers, they'd still be unprofitable in the long-term as they would incur huge losses and only win little due to emotions hampering their profits and deepening their losses. And me, as someone who had felt extreme attachment to my profits or losses just recently could immediately relate.  I remember reading about the old trading floors in Chicago and New York and the intensity of the trades and the day and though I loved trading and the markets, I did not want my daily mood to be determined by the ups and downs. Was there a way to minimize human emotion? I only recently learned more about quantitative trading and the use of data analytics to define small, but significant predictive factors. After some more reading and research, It was clear that this certain subgroup of traders had an extreme edge over their competition. Their proprietary scripts and black-box algos scared the rest of the markets in the past but quants were revolutionizing the field as early as the 80s. One notable revolutionary quant trader is Jim Simons, a quant firm owner and trader who  has made a profit of 66% for thirty years straight. While Wall street was laboring away getting early GDP reports and studying stock fundamentals, Simons and others like him were able to loosely model the stock market and all its participants and derive somewhat-predictive variables that gave them edges that the rest of the market participants did not even realize existed. In other words, they made a killing. Nowadays, quants are crucial to Wall Street and other investment banks, with traders and analysts slowly being phased out for quants and data scientists. 
     
		 Knowing all of this, I tried my best studying code in an attempt to add some sort of systematic approach. Unsurprisingly, it was impossible to decipher anything being discussed, and this is when I had my first inklings to pursue data science professionally. Though my part-time job is going well, the explicit job of trading has been on a downwards slope. And to be successful in the industry long-term, I needed to readjust and teach myself the crucial skills to survive in that industry. I knew it was going to be difficult, but I've always loved the process of learning something new.  I had heard about certain programs that, although arduous, would teach me the backbones of what I needed to become a successful data scientist. So with nervous excitement, I decided to go for it and enrolled in Flatiron's Data Science Course on December 2019.

