---
layout: post
title:      "Project 1: How It Went"
date:       2020-01-30 09:56:09 +0000
permalink:  project_1_how_it_went
---


    Ultimately, the project was challenging. The free-form scenario meant that the overall backbone of the project was very important. Every step had to be done with a reason and for a practical purpose and had to be explainable as well. Though this made the project difficult generally, I felt the practical knowledge and experience we gained from it was invaluable. Practicing my python skills in this manner especially helped me as they varied greatly in style from what we had been used to with the curriculum. 

    The most difficult part for me was grasping all the accumulated concepts we had learned and using them together in a practical manner. I had a surface-level understanding of many of the functions and dataframe-types from going through the curriculum. This project forced me to confront those shortfallings. Looking back on the previous lesson and their material really helped as well. 
Having to do the project free-form was also a new challenge for me. A good portion of the project was simply coming up with ideas on how to join the data to obtain relevant information. A lot of the dataset was very sketchy in general. There was a lot of missing data and a lot of weird variations of the same data. After viewing through the eight dataframes, I chose only four. My approach was to take the tconstant column in two tables and combine them to compare ratings to profits. The other dataframes could be joined on the title column after some cleaning and give date vs. profits and some other correlations. While doing so however, I ran into many difficulties that took up a lot of my time. I didn’t understand the join function and spent many hours trying to figure out how to correctly join two dataframes using pandas. Finally figuring it out, I must say, was extremely satisfying and all the research I did helped me practice looking up solutions to answers on google. The rest of the project was a lot easier, and I was able to find several other correlations along with possible explanations for those correlations. Making so many charts throughout the project was also very helpful. It gave me more confidence in manipulating and viewing the data, as well as cementing in some skills learned previously in modifying the graphs and charts. Rafael’s data in the beginning really helped give me an idea of what to do. At the same time, it was very intimidating. The project itself felt really good to complete as it is an extremely relevant question to real-life data scientist skills. It felt good and really feels like I am on the right path to completing what I set out to do. 

     I’ve also begun to appreciate and realize the power of data. I had no idea I would be able to find to many significant correlations. Also, the sheer amount of raw data in these dataframes itself meant it would be extremely difficult to view these correlations without the use of extensive coding. The nature of the large datasets felt very intimidating at first but with more practice with the dataframes, they did not bother me at all. However, there are definitely some weaknesses that I have to work on. I was running into some trouble working with the pandas dataframes and getting the plots to show correctly. 
This project also taught me the importance of having accurate, clean columns as well as the ability to manually clean columns if neccesary. There was a lot of additional noise added in the titles column, for example, making it very hard to join the data and keep the values. While joining two dataframes on titles, I lost around 90% of my raw data as titles from one dataframe were 
     
		 The non-technical presentation helped me cement in the practical uses of what I had found from my code. Having that goal was a good push to constantly relate my graphs to real, practical applications with the data. While data is important, it is critical to realize where raw data relationships has its shortfalls. For example, when I plotted movie profits by month, the returned correlation has almost no significance it you did not understand the schedule in which studios release movies. While you would naturally expect movies to sell the most tickets during holiday months such as December and April, December and January had low movie profits. After further research, I was able to explain this phenomenon as studios tended to not schedule around December and January releases as only this was the cut-off for movie award consideration. Therefore, there was a boom of movie releases in February. This phenomenon was otherwise unexplainable through the data itself and needed further research into the causation of the phenomenon. The non-technical presentation also helped me verbalize my thoughts and present them in a way that anybody from outside the data science field could understand. This was very good practice for what will probably be a future interview question or the work itself. 
    
		I was also able to talk and discuss the project with my classmates. It definitely felt better to go through a relatively challenging project with other students struggling besides you. I felt like we were able to discuss similar problems and methods of approach, helping me both by giving my ideas as well as allowing me to see other perspectives for problems. Using office hours was also very beneficial to my progress. It gave me a professional take on the problem at hand and helped answer many problems that I felt we were not prepared to answer yet. Also, reaching out to my classmates was extremely helpful and helping others with their problems was also satisfying while cementing in my hard knowledge. 
		
		 This project was a lot harder than expected. It took me a long time to start in the first place as I had trouble visualizing what exactly I had to do. Yet, it was great practice, and the process itself was very enlightening. And after it was all finished and working, I felt extremely accomplished and relieved.

